README.md, before:

---
js:
  - https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/mermaid/dist/mermaid.min.js
---

# SummX

> By Andrew Maner, Ph.D. | November 2025

**SummX** is a local, agent-based AI tool designed to search, retrieve, and summarize academic papers from online sources like arXiv.

It uses a multi-step, agentic pipeline to convert natural language queries into structured, summarized research findings.

## Core Features

-   **Natural Language Queries**: Ask for papers in plain English (e.g., "most recent papers on hypergraphs").
-   **Agentic Pipeline**: A `QueryPlanner` converts your request into a structured `SearchPlan`, which a `PlanExecutor` then executes.
-   **Pluggable Backends**:
    -   **LLM Providers**: Supports multiple LLM backends (OpenAI, Groq) for planning and summarization.
    -   **Paper Sources**: A `PaperSourceClient` interface allows for multiple paper backends. The primary backend is a direct client for the arXiv API. An experimental MCP-based client is also included.
-   **CLI & Web UI**: Interact with SummX through a command-line interface or a Streamlit-based web UI.
-   **Local-First**: Designed for local execution and caching of results.

## Architecture

SummX follows a modular, API-first design. The core agent logic is decoupled from the data sources, allowing for greater stability and extensibility.

```mermaid
classDiagram
    class UserInterface {
        <<CLI / WebUI>>
    }

    class PaperAgent {
        +run(query)
    }

    class QueryPlanner {
        +plan(query)
    }

    class PlanExecutor {
        +execute(plan)
    }

    class PaperSourceClient {
        <<Interface>>
        +search_papers(plan)
        +read_paper(arxiv_id)
    }

    class ArxivApiClient
    class ArxivMcpClient

    UserInterface --> PaperAgent
    PaperAgent --> QueryPlanner
    PaperAgent --> PlanExecutor
    PlanExecutor --> PaperSourceClient
    PaperSourceClient <|-- ArxivApiClient
    PaperSourceClient <|-- ArxivMcpClient
```

This architecture ensures that the core functionality does not depend on the availability of any single external service (like an MCP server) and can be easily extended to support new paper sources in the future.

## Quick Start

### 1. Installation

Clone the repository and install the dependencies in a virtual environment:

```bash
# Create and activate a virtual environment
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate

# Install the package in editable mode with dev dependencies
pip install -e ".[dev]"
```

### 2. Configuration

SummX is configured via environment variables, which can be placed in a `.env` file in the project root.

#### Required

- `OPENAI_API_KEY`: Your API key for OpenAI.
- `GROQ_API_KEY`: Your API key for Groq.

```
# .env
OPENAI_API_KEY="your-openai-api-key"
GROQ_API_KEY="your-groq-api-key"
```

#### Optional

- `PAPER_SOURCE`: The paper source to use. Defaults to `api`. Can be set to `mcp` for the experimental MCP backend.
- `PLANNER_PROVIDER`: The LLM provider for the planner. Defaults to `openai`.
- `PLANNER_MODEL`: The specific model for the planner. Defaults to `gpt-4o-mini`.
- `SUMMARIZER_PROVIDER`: The LLM provider for the summarizer. Defaults to `groq`.
- `SUMMARIZER_MODEL`: The specific model for the summarizer. Defaults to `llama-3.1-8b-instant`.

### 3. Usage

#### Command-Line Interface (CLI)

Run a query from your terminal:

```bash
summx query "five most recent papers on hypergraphs"
```

#### Web UI

Launch the Streamlit web interface:

```bash
summx ui
```

This will open the UI in your web browser, where you can interactively search for and summarize papers.

Commit message:

docs: update README to clarify ArxivMcpClient as planned future feature
- Change paper sources description to indicate MCP client is planned but not implemented
- Mark ArxivMcpClient as <<deferred>> in architecture diagram
- Update class relationship from inheritance to dependency (dashed line) to reflect deferred status

README.md, after:

---
js:
  - https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/mermaid/dist/mermaid.min.js
---

# SummX

> By Andrew Maner, Ph.D. | November 2025

**SummX** is a local, agent-based AI tool designed to search, retrieve, and summarize academic papers from online sources like arXiv.

It uses a multi-step, agentic pipeline to convert natural language queries into structured, summarized research findings.

## Core Features

-   **Natural Language Queries**: Ask for papers in plain English (e.g., "most recent papers on hypergraphs").
-   **Agentic Pipeline**: A `QueryPlanner` converts your request into a structured `SearchPlan`, which a `PlanExecutor` then executes.
-   **Pluggable Backends**:
    -   **LLM Providers**: Supports multiple LLM backends (OpenAI, Groq) for planning and summarization.
    -   **Paper Sources**: A `PaperSourceClient` interface allows for multiple paper backends. The primary backend is a direct client for the arXiv API. An MCP-based client is planned for future development but is not currently implemented.
-   **CLI & Web UI**: Interact with SummX through a command-line interface or a Streamlit-based web UI.
-   **Local-First**: Designed for local execution and caching of results.

## Architecture

SummX follows a modular, API-first design. The core agent logic is decoupled from the data sources, allowing for greater stability and extensibility.

```mermaid
classDiagram
    class UserInterface {
        <<CLI / WebUI>>
    }

    class PaperAgent {
        +run(query)
    }

    class QueryPlanner {
        +plan(query)
    }

    class PlanExecutor {
        +execute(plan)
    }

    class PaperSourceClient {
        <<Interface>>
        +search_papers(plan)
        +read_paper(arxiv_id)
    }

    class ArxivApiClient
    class ArxivMcpClient {
        <<deferred>>
    }

    UserInterface --> PaperAgent
    PaperAgent --> QueryPlanner
    PaperAgent --> PlanExecutor
    PlanExecutor --> PaperSourceClient
    PaperSourceClient <|-- ArxivApiClient
    PaperSourceClient <|.. ArxivMcpClient
```

This architecture ensures that the core functionality does not depend on the availability of any single external service (like an MCP server) and can be easily extended to support new paper sources in the future.

## Quick Start

### 1. Installation

Clone the repository and install the dependencies in a virtual environment:

```bash
# Create and activate a virtual environment
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate

# Install the package in editable mode with dev dependencies
pip install -e ".[dev]"
```

### 2. Configuration

SummX is configured via environment variables, which can be placed in a `.env` file in the project root.

#### Required

- `OPENAI_API_KEY`: Your API key for OpenAI.
- `GROQ_API_KEY`: Your API key for Groq.

```
# .env
OPENAI_API_KEY="your-openai-api-key"
GROQ_API_KEY="your-groq-api-key"
```

#### Optional

- `PAPER_SOURCE`: The paper source to use. Defaults to `api`. Can be set to `mcp` for the experimental MCP backend.
- `PLANNER_PROVIDER`: The LLM provider for the planner. Defaults to `openai`.
- `PLANNER_MODEL`: The specific model for the planner. Defaults to `gpt-4o-mini`.
- `SUMMARIZER_PROVIDER`: The LLM provider for the summarizer. Defaults to `groq`.
- `SUMMARIZER_MODEL`: The specific model for the summarizer. Defaults to `llama-3.1-8b-instant`.

### 3. Usage

#### Command-Line Interface (CLI)

Run a query from your terminal:

```bash
summx query "five most recent papers on hypergraphs"
```

#### Web UI

Launch the Streamlit web interface:

```bash
summx ui
```

This will open the UI in your web browser, where you can interactively search for and summarize papers.
